Gross's account of the massacre began not on July 10, 1941, but--in a bid to give historical context to the massacre--two-hundred years earlier. When Jedwabne received its town charter in 1736, it had alredy been settled for at least three hundred years. It's Jewish population bled over from the nearby town of Tykocin, and Jews were initially subject to the Tykocin Jewish communal authority. By 1770, however, Jedwabne Jews constructed a wooden synnagogue. The Jewish population numbered three-hundred-eighty-seven, a clear majority in a town with a total population of only four-hundred-fifty. Jedwabne's population climaxed at 3,000 on the eve of WWI but the devastation of war and the russian policy of jewish resettlement from near-front-line territories reduced the number of inhabitants to seven hundred. Over the next two decades, Jedwabne's population slowly recovered. By 1931, Jedwabne boasted 2,167 inhabitants. Jews formed a majority of the town's 144 craftsmen.

The interwar period, was not without bouts of antisemitism. In 1934, a Jewish woman was killed in Jedwabne. The shooting of a peasent in a neighboring town a few days later fueled a rumor that Jedwabne's Jews had taken revenge on the poles. However, Gross contends that, true to his monograph's title, Jedwabne's Jews and Poles were mostly peaceful neighbors.

The first period of soviet occupation strained this uneasy relationship. The signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact on August 23, 1939 paved the way for WWII and effectively partitioned Poland between the USSR and Germany. Hitler's armies invaded poland on September 1, 1939, followed by the Red Army on September 17. The precise boundaries of the parition, however, were not finalized until September 28th. Thus, for a brief period in the Autumn of 1939, Jedwabne was occupied by the Wehrmact, then surrendered to Soviet authorities. During this period, Jews across Poland aquired the reputaiton of having a priveledged relationship with the soviet occupiers. Gross does not doubt that Jews filled some government positions, but contends that there are no indications that the relationship between Jews and Poles in Jedwabne was any more antagonistic than elsewhere in Poland.

In Gross's account in Neighbors, pogrom began on the morning of July 10, 1941, when Jedwabne's town council met with the Gestapo. Shortly thereafter, the town's mayor ordered Jedwabne's gendarmerie to organize the non-Jewish population of the town for the collection of nearby Jews into the town square. After being gathered into the town square, one group of Jews was ordered to dismantle a statue of Vladamir Lenin and carry it out of town while singing Soviet anthems. This group of Jews, including the local Rabbi, were lead into a barn and killed. Later that day, the remaining Jewish population of Jedwabne was gathered into the barn and immolated.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jedwabne received twon charter in 1736, already settled for 300+ years
jews came from Tykocin (Tiktin), initially subject to Tykocin Jewish communal authority.

1770 - synagogue built <16>
    387 Jews lived in jedwabne, total population of 450
    
Peak population on eve of WWI - 3,000
By 1916: 700
    wartime devastation + russian policy of jewish resettlement from near-front-line territories
1931 - 2167, 60^ identified as jews. 
1933
    144 craftsmen
    36 tailors
    24 shoemakers
    mostly jewish
    
Some violent outbursts of antisemitism
    1934 - jewish woman killed
    pesant shot to death in a neighboring town
    remor that jedwabne jewws had taken revenge on the poles
    took it as 'matter of course' that secular/religious authorities should be appeased with gifts.
    Quiet until war.
    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Soviet Occupation <21>

Aug 23 1939 - Mootov Ribbentrop pact
    paved way for WWII
    
Partitioned Poland
    Half of poland occupied in Sept 1939 by ussr
    Hitler invaded poland on sept 1, 1939
    red army invaded sept 17 1939
    german soviet boundary finalized on sept 28
    "crowded calendar"
    initially some confusion
    Autom of 1939 - Jedwabne occuied by Wehrmact, then surrendered to soviet authorities
    
Jews accused of running government
    no doubt filled some positions.
    
Not any more antoagonistic than elsewhere in poland <23>
Jews portrayed as having priviledged relationship with occupiers

------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Gross's account in Neighbors, pogrom began on the morning of July 10, 1941, when Jedwabne's town council met with the Gestapo.  

Shortly thereafter, the town's mayor ordered Jedwabne's gendarmerie to organize the non-Jewish population of the town for the collection of nearby Jews into the town square. 

After being gathered into the town square, the pogrom proceeded with cruelty. One group of Jews was ordered to dismantle a statue of Vladamir Lenin and carry it out of town while singing Soviet anthems. 

This group of Jews, including the local Rabbi, were lead into a barn and killed. Later that day, the remaining Jewish population of Jedwabne was gathered into the barn and immolated.
