Collaboration Passed Over In Silence

<233> Apart from a small number of communists in the towns and an even smaller number in the countryside, the Polish population responded to the USR's agression and the Soviety system being created there the same way it had reacted to the German Agresstion. 

By contrast, the Jewish population, especially young eole and the town-dwelling poor, staged a mass welcome for the invading army and took part in introducing the new order--some with weapons in hand. <224>

The revolts were directed against the Polish state. This was armed collaboration, siding with the enemy, ttreason committed during days of defeat. How large was it, in all probability, we will never be able to present any figures. <225>

Arrangements in Public Offices

The militias, red guards, and revolutionary committees were the first to cooperate, and the worker's guards and citizens' militas began later. In towns, they consisted mainly of Polish Jews. Subsequently, when the Worker-easant Militias took control of the situation, Jews--as Soviet documents have indicated--were considerably overrepresented in them. Polish Jews in civilian dress, wearing red armbands and armed with rifles, participated in the arrests and deportations in large numbers. This was the most extreme example, but for olish society the most glaring fact was the large number of Jews in Soviet public offices and institutions--the more so since Poles had been the dominant group before the war! <225>

20 Sept 1940, conferance in Minskt, head of municipal NKVD in Lomza stated: "Such a practice has taken root here. The jews have supported us and only they were always visible. It has become fashionable for the director of every institution to boast that he no longer has a single Pole working for him. Many of us were simply afraid of the poles." <225>

Wierzbicki summarizes situation:
    The bloated Soviet administrative structures gave masses of unemployed Jews the opportunitiy to find jobs. That was of no mean importance to them, since the industrially impoverished towns of the eastern orderlands had provided few job opportunities. Being considerably better educated than the Belarusian community, the jewish population rovided numerous clerks, teachers, and functionaries of the security apparatus. That undoubtedly influenced Polish-Jewish relations, since Jews most frequently took the lace of previous clerks and teachers of Polish nationality... Moreover, between September and December 1939, many representatives of the Polish community who had held senior posts in the administration and political authorities of the Polish state before the war, or who had been engaged in public affairs were arrested. Local jews--members of the interim administration or militia--were very helpful to the Soviet authorities intracking down and detaining them. 
    
Continued, citing Gross:
    "It also occured that representaties of the Jewish population ridiculed Poles, emphasizing the sudden change of fate that had befallen both communities. Often directed to Poles were such malicious remarks as "You wanted a Polandwithotu Jews, now you have Jews without Poland' or 'Your time is over' <226>
    

<228>
Inded, jews may not have had things too good in prewar Poland, and there was undoubtedly "a balance sheet of wrongs" to quote Broniewski's poem. However, they were not deported to Siberia; they were not shot or sent to concentration camps; they were not killed through starvation and hard labor. If they did not regard Poland as their homeland, they did not have to treat it as an occuation regime, and join its mortal enemy in killing Polish soldiers and murdering Polish civilians fleeing to the East. They also did not have to take part in fingering their neighbors for deportations, those heinous acts of collective resonsibility.

<234>
Did the Polish inhabitants of Jedwabne and the surrounding villages enthusastically welcome the Germans as saviours? Yes they did! If smoone pulls me out of a blazing house in which I could burn to a crisp in seconds, I will embrade adn thank that person. Even if the next day I regard him as yet another mortal enemy. At that time, the Germans rescued hundreds of local villagers (perhaps also Jedwabne residents??) who had for days been hiding in the fields or the brush-covered slopes of the Biebrza. They saved them from being sent to their death in the wastelands of Kazakhstan or the Siberian taiga. By then, everyone knew what such expile ment [...] 

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jedlicki

<240>
Poles were indifferent to the Jews-pleaseantly or contemptuously indifferent--as long as it was clear that the social status of the Jews was beneath that of the gentry, the Christian bourgeoisie,and the intelligentsia. The indifference disappeared when the Jews, at different times in the different partitions,began to claim equal legal, and sometimes civil, rights, and then the equal treatment of their language and culture as well. The more collective dignity they achieved, the more they became a national (as opposed to jsut followers of the Old Testament), and the tenser their relations grew with Polish circles that turned otu to be reluctant and, in their view, unable to support such aspirations. Added to these developments was a wave of racist antisemtism from the West that sought to block all paths to assimilation (  int hte sense of integgration in terms of cutoms or, i nsome cases, of consciousness, to the point that any distingusihing features, often including religious denomination vanished_. 

The zealous champion of antisemtisim in Poland, as is well known, was the Endecja (the national Democrats). However, dislike and even animosity ttoward the jews spread to other olitical groups--except for those oon the left--and to the Catholic Church. Shortly before World War I, the struggle against the Jews became an obsession, garnering more coverage in the Warsaw press and stirring up more emotions than any other issue.  <241>

'They wre diverse as any nation, representing all ossible classes and political views. They were deeply religious orcompletely secularized, nationalistic or totally Polonized, immesnely wealthy or starving to death, brilliant and primtive, full of virtues and vices. However, regardless of who they were, what they did, or why they earned merit or condemnation all were targets of demeaning accusations nad insults from all sides simply because they were Jewish. <241>

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Roundtable




