Nazi Nation Building
    Volksgemeinschaft - community before the individual
    Fuhrerprinzip
    Racial Purity
    Hatred of enemies
    
Space to Live
    Settler Colonialism
        Algeria
        German East
    
Nation Building
    Genericization
        
    Specialization
    
    
Hindenberg Election Poster 1932
http://germanhistorydocs.ghi-dc.org/sub_image.cfm?image_id=4361

The Swastika Rises like the Sun over the Reichstag and the Bismarck Memorial, Postcard (undated)
http://germanhistorydocs.ghi-dc.org/sub_image.cfm?image_id=2086

Reichstag Election of March 5, 1933: "The Reich will Never be Destroyed if You are United and Loyal" (1933)
http://germanhistorydocs.ghi-dc.org/sub_image.cfm?image_id=2097

The Eternal Jew [Der ewige Jude], Film Poster (September 1940)
http://germanhistorydocs.ghi-dc.org/sub_image.cfm?image_id=2331

The Defense of the Home Front: The Enemy is Listening In (1942)
http://germanhistorydocs.ghi-dc.org/sub_image.cfm?image_id=1924


The rise of Nazi Germany deservedly receives much of the scholarly work on nationalism, as the development of German nationalism.

By a wide margin, the rise of nationalism in the region that is now Germany has received a majority of the academic study of nationalism. This distinction is well deserved; beyond the infamy surrounding German Nationalism, the story of its development is dramatic.

The transformation of Adolf Hitler from a fringe radical to Fuhrer was a monument of social engineering that required that broad popular support be engendered for a contentious platform. As with other european powers, the Nazis leveraged proaganda as a means to stir public support, yet the final push of the Nazi party into mainstream politics was linked to a failure of propaganda: rather than risk further alienating Germans with extreme anti-semtitism, the Nazis demphazied the political part of their platform in the late 1920s.

Nazi propaganda did not push policy, but people. 

The defining charactaristic of Nazi propaganda was operative: Nazi propagandists leveraged a common design language to enable a new class of discourse among German natinoals. Rather than directly pushing Nazi ideologies, the propaganda of BLAH functioned by redefinign the face of the German Nation.

Propaganda, as an ideological creation, exists on no less than three planes. In its most visceral form, propaganda is a collage of visual and textual motifs. The most tangible plane of propaganda is its existance as a collection of visual and gramatical motifs. The ideas and emotions evoked by motifs constitutes the thematic extistance of propaganda. Historian David Wench, for examples, charactarizes four primary themes of Nazi propaganda as community, charismatic leadership, racial purity, and demonization of national enemies. The motif of masculinity, for example, served to reinforce the theme of leader principal. How the themes of propaganda effected change is propaganda's operative planes.

Motifs, then, are the least important aspect of propaganda. Although hypermasculinity was the most pervasive motif in propaganda of the Third Reich, it was by no stretch the defining factor of Hitler's brand of nationalism. While the increasing frequency of hypermasculinity as a motif in Nazi propaganda correlates neatly with broadening popular support, this has more to do with the wavering solvency of the Wimar republic.

By the 1932 presidential election, both Hitler and Hidenburg's propagandists used hyppermasculinity to advertise their strength to the german people. Although eighty-five years of age and in failing health, Hidenburg's camaign lauded the War Heros herculean strength. In one vivid campaign poster, Hidenburg, rendered as Atlas incarnate, bears the weight of the earth effortlessly on his shoulders. Hitler, drwarfed and childlike at Hidenburgs feet pleads: "But I'm still much stronger!"


Seeking to mold the thoughts of the greatest number of Germans as possible, propagandists employed universally accessible metaphors for stability.



Hypermasculinity was the most pervasive motif of the propaganda of the Third Reich, but 

Hypermasculinity was the most virulent motif of the propaganda of the Third Reich.
Hypermasculinity, the most virulent motif of the propaganda of the Third Reich an enduring synonym of nazi iconography 


The operative charactaristic of these propaganda efforts is that rather than defining policy, they functioned by defining the face of a German nation.

Three Motifs Nazi Propaganda
Hyper masculinity
solidarity
uniformity

Motif           Theme       Effect
Masculinity     Stability   
Solidarity      


Nation Formation

