913 221 9197


Title
    The Rehabilitation of National Conscience and the Repatriation of Defeat
    

Three questions:
1. What Mechanisms Build National Identity?
2. What Mechanisms Damage it
3. What Mechanisms are used to repair it?

Ideological Mechanisms
    Genericization - Nazi Propaganda, American Advertising in WWI
    Specialization
    
Physical Mechanisms
    Expatriation
    Repatriation

     
1. What Mechanisms Build National Identity?
    Nations are built via the processes of genericization and specialization
    These mechanisms answer 'who' should be in the nation, and what's so special about it

What makes expatriation and repatriation distinct from migration?
    -PATRIATION

What about national guilt?
    Guilt and Celebration are not mechanisms of nationalism. 
    National Celebration IS Nationalism
    National Guilt IS NOT Nationalism
     - Nations do not experience guilt, individuals do
     
Questiosn:
    What's the relationship between the physical mechanisms and the ideological mechanisms?
    
    Patriotism is the lowest common denominator
    
    
    
SECTION 1: THE BIRTH OF A NATION
    America
    Germany
    France

SECTION 2: DAMAGING OF A NATION
    Loss of a war.
        France
        Germany
        Poland

SECTION 3: REBUILDING A NATION
    Germany POW
    Germany Reun
    Poland
    
    
Plan for Section 1:
Look simply at the birth of a nation through genericization and specialization





Maybe in section two, relate thsoe forces to expatriation and repatriation
    

    
    
Genericization Studies
    1. American Advertising
    2. Nazi Propaganda
    3. German Reunification
    
Maybe not. 


    
    
    
Idea: Nations aren't damaged, they're diminished.
Idea: National guilt is NOT a repair mechanism; you can't build a national guilt


     
Case Studies
    Nazi 
    German POWs
    Pieds Noirs
    Treatment of French Writers after WWII
    German Reunification


    
Genericization is a form of Re/Expatriation?
 
    
Repatriation and Patriation

National Guilt as a Failed Model




How did East Germany React to PoWs?

How did West Germany React to PoWs?



#1 National Guilt as a failed Model
Prescriptive, or descriptive?

#2 Physical Repatriations
A: Return of PoWs to Germany
What about it?

What was the coping mechanism?


#3 Ideological Repatriatons
German Reunification
GENERICIZATION!

What was the coping mechanism?
Genericization





Homecomings - Physical Repatriations


Nations are Imagined Communities (Benedict Anderson)

Nationalism is a process of differentiation.

Nations differentiate via genericization and specilization

Repatriation 




------------------------------------------------------------------------
Imagined Homogeniety: The Challenges of Repatriating Defeat

Section: The Controversy of National Guilt
IntroPara:  National Guilt is awash with controversy
Paragraph:  Nationalism, in the descriptive sense, is relatively uncontroversial.
Paragraph:  Nationalism in the prescriptive sense is political
ThesisPar:  A. National guilt is a failure. It's a politicized concept and historians deserve better.
ThesisPar:  B. National guilt does not describe the range of ways in which nations are rehabilitated
ThesisPar:  C. National guilt does not exist in a normative sense.

[Unresolved: Historiography?]

Section: Differentiation
IntroPara:  Nationalism is a process of differentiation
            Diferentiation occurs via genericization and differentiation.
SbSection:  Nazi propaganda as the canonical case of genericization.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Of all of academia's exports to popular culture, none have instigated controversy quite like "National Guilt" has. It is a well-worn tool of historians, sociologists, and politicians, but despite the common moniker the concept of "national guilt" is utterly amorphous. In part, the controvery over national guilt might be blamed on shakey foundations. Nationalism, broadly defined, usually describes either (1) the state of poccessing a national identity, or (2) the actions of individuals in trying to cultivate the pocession of a national identity. However, either of these definitions may also be understood in the prescriptive or descriptive sense. Nationalism, in the descriptive sense, is mostly the domain of academica: the study of national identities in human history. Nationalism, in the prescriptive sense, is the advocacy of national identities. Surely, one could be a historian--but not an advocate--of nationalism.

The construct of national guilt, too, lies within this spectrum. Although academics (in most cases) purport to use national guilt descriptively, statements on national guilt seem to be more often received by popular culture in the prescriptive sense. This transformation of understanding has been endemic to "national guilt" since the coining of the term. In 1945, Carl Jung asserted that "Kollektivschuld" categorically plagued post-war Germans: "[Collective Guilt is] for psychologists a fact, and it will be one of the most important tasks of therapy to bring the Germans to recognize this guilt." Jung spoke descriptively, believing that Germans endured a trauma by way of their defeat, but his phrasing was widly interpreted as a prescription; that is, Germans should be made to understand that they are guilty. The controversy Jung generated is prototypical of the damage that the study of nationalism has suffered at the hands of the observer effect. Once a descriptive statement on nationalism escapes from academia into popular culture, it invariably takes on a new life as normative declaration. Even if one ignores the consequences of distilling academic theory into public opinion, the conceptual forms taken by national guilt across history, sociology and philosophy remain unsatisfactorily amorphous. It seems prudent to distinguish between the psychoanalysis of individuals, the theories of sociologists, the theories of sociologists, and the analyses of historians. 

On this basis alone, it might be reasonably said that the humanities deserves a more exacting tool. However, if 'national guilt' purports to describe the process of recovering from a damaged national conscience, it does so poorly. National guilt, like nationalism, is a compelling tool for constructing social narratives but consequently, it is used is used undeservedly as a catch-all for the range of ways in which nations may cope with damage to the national conscience. As Tara Zharo noted in "Imagined Noncommunities", the narrative of nationalism is perhaps so tantalizing, that academics have failed to give the possibility national indifference due consideration. 

Finally, I contend that 'national guilt' does not exist, at least not in the same way one would expect if the word 'guilt' were to be exchanged for 'pride'. National pride is wholey uncontroversial; who would take issue in sharing with the successes of another? However, while the existance of national pride might seem like it invites the existance of an antipode--national shame--guilt and pride are experienced in fundamentally different manners.  Neither stand independently; national pride is as inextricable from the language of victory as national shame is from the language of defeat. However, whereas national pride is experience collectively and electively, national shame is experienced individually and imposed externally.

In lieu of using "national guilt" as a catch-all for the aftermath of a trauma to the national conscience, I propose "national rehabilitation" as a more agnostic device. The identification of repatriation and expatriation events provides a fruitful lense for identifying cases that span the range of traumas that the national conscience might endur. Twentieth century europe is unquestionably rich with cases of repatriation in the traditional, migratory sense. The defeat of Germany in WWII brought with it the expulsion and repatriation of millions of Germans who were living beyond the boarders designated for Germany in the Paris Peace Treaties. In 1955, the last German prisoners of war were released from Russian captivity to both East and West Germany, with each reacting drastically differently to the repatriation. Meanwhile, the collapse of European colonialism brought with it the return of millions of colonial settlers back to Europe. This was experienced especially intensely by France after the French-Algerian War, with the immigration of pieds-noirs. Europe's grandest reparation event came in 1989 with the Fall of the Berlin Wall and the reunification of East and West Germany. 

Through this comparative analysis, the undesirable consequences of national guilt's politicization will be readily apparent, but more importantly, I will demonstrate that these cases entail national rehabilitation in ways that the world 'guilt' is not convincingly applicable. Most importantly, I hope to show through comparative analysis that guilt is as insoluable to nationalsim as oil is to water.  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Like national guilt, nationalism itself is an amorphous term featuring its own slew of interpretations. Benedict Andersen's charactarization of a nation as an "imagined community" provides an influential 

Attempting to address nation divided by gender, race, religion, and opinion, propagandists achieved efficacy by stirring public opinion on the broadest terms possible. If the challenge was to reach individuals with little more in common than they were each alive in the same country, it would be on those terms to which they were appealed. Patriotic imagery abounds in Wartime propaganda with near-universal utilization of tricolor pallet, the American flag, icons such as Uncle Sam, and even appeals by perished political figures: "That government of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth," appealed the faux-embossed head of Abraham Lincoln in one poster, "Buy Liberty Bonds." Complementing hyper-patriotism were advertisements ad hominem. One poster depicts a handsome, uniformed American against a dramatic blue sky with a rifle slung over his shoulder. His stance, triumphant and masculine is as defiant as the caption: "And they thought we couldn't fight!" The challenge of honor is archetypal of posters of this genre; The Second Artillery called for "200 REAL MEN" ("Will you be the one?"). Women, too, were courted along similar gender roles. The Food and Drug Administration fielded a slew of regionally targeted posters instructing women on the food to supply their household with. The "knit a bit" campaign went a step further in requesting women to use their skill of knitting for the war effort. 



------------------------------------------------------------------------



