

Thus far, I have attempted to demonstrate that events for which the experiences of
repatriation and expatriation can be identified (although not necessarily in that order), are also
moments of great upheaval for the national conscience. If broadly applicable it might not just be
said that these two elements are canaries for turmoil in the national conscience, but that turmoil
of the national conscience may be understood by identifying a repatriation an an expatriation
event. 


To demonstrate these inadequacies, I will comparatively analyze repatriation and expatriation events.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

The propaganda of America in World War I, in its aim to appeal to all through imagery, pallet, and message, established a lowest common denominator against which emerging groups, vying for legitimacy, juxtaposed themselves.



n the transition of Adolf Hitler from a fringe radical to Führer, the Nazi party faced the monumental task of engendering popular support for a contentious platform. At the center of Hitler’s totalitarian power was Führerprinzip, leader-principal. As with other European powers, the Nazi’s leveraged propaganda as a means to stir public support, yet the final push of the Nazi party into mainstream politics was linked to a failure of propaganda: rather than risk further alienating Germans with extreme anti-semitism, the Nazi’s de-emphasized the particular platform in the late ‘20s. Distinct from the propaganda of policy, what is remembered today as the archetypal model of Nazi propaganda was an expression of Führerprinzip.  The propaganda of Führerprinzip was not just a pattern of motifs nor a common ideological goal, although these features were extant. The defining characteristic of Nazi propaganda was operative. Categorically, Nazi propagandists leveraged a common design language to enable a new breed of discourse among German nationals. Rather than directly pushing Nazi ideologies, the propaganda of Führerprinzip functioned by redefining the very face of the German nation.

Hypermasculinity, the most pervasive motif of propaganda in the Third Reich and the enduring symbol of Nazi Führerprinzip, was not the defining factor of Hitler's virulent strain of loyalty and obedience. While the increasing frequency of hypermasculinity as a motif in Nazi propaganda correlates neatly with broadening popular support, the wavering solvency of the Weimar republic is a more accurate narrative. Seeking to mold the thoughts of the greatest number of Germans as possible, propagandists, Nazi and otherwise, employed universally accessible metaphors for stability. By the 1932 presidential election, both Hitler's and Hindenburg's propagandists used hypermasculinity to emphasize their their strength to the German people. Although 85 years of age and in failing health, Hindenburg's campaign lauded the War Hero's herculean strength. In one vivid campaign poster, Hindenburg, rendered as Atlas incarnate, bears the weight of the earth effortlessly on his shoulders. Hitler, dwarfed and childlike at Hindenburg's feet pleaded, "but I’m still much stronger!" 

Moreso than motifs, the characteristic and unique expression of Führerprinzip in Nazi propaganda was that it defined rules of engagement. Less than a year after the divisive presidential campaigns of March 1922, the faces of Hitler and Hindenburg appeared side by side on a poster declaring "The Reich will Never be Destroyed if You are United and Loyal." The turn-about was rooted in political developments—Hindenburg had appointed Hitler Chancellor of Germany—, but the cessation of hostilities had little to do with any political reconciliation between the two men. Rather, Nazi propaganda reflected a deference paid by the party to the demagoguery of leaders that transcended politics.

In addition to framing discussion over politics, the tropes of Führerprinzip propaganda conceived a new iconography for German Nation. Utilizing patterns of monolithic rhetoric and imagery, the motifs of Nazi Führerprinzip propaganda subordinated and collected vast swaths of people into icons in their own right. To this end, the monolith of the human figure is used in two distinct variations. Emphasizing strength, passion, and stability, Nazi propaganda employed the imagery of the full-figure of a man with super-human height or physique. Elevating himself high above a sea of masses during his fiery orations, Hitler himself transformed his image into Atlas. Emphasizing loyalty, compassion, and intelligence, the closely-framed image of the head is also used. The motif is often realized with two heads facing the same direction when an emphasis on unity is desired. The 1933 poster jointly featuring Hindenburg and Hitler utilized this format. Prominent Nazi Propagandist Mjölnir employed this trope extensively, such as pairing the profiles of man and soldier. In posters regarding the Reich's enemies, the implicitly weaker motif of the head shot is used almost exclusively. On the famous film poster of "The Eternal Jew,” five disembodied faces peer in different directions, suggesting contorted intentions and disunity.

In writing, superscalar figures and tightly-framed faces were superseded by grammatical patterns that implied unity within demographics. Referring to demographics with singular rather than plural terms was a common device for collectivising individuals. Speaking to the National Socialist Women's Organization, Hitler promised prosperity to "the German woman," not "German women," and in discussion of the roles of the respective genders used "Man" and "Woman" exclusively. The exception that proves the rule is an anecdote Hitler provides about a German woman who lauded to Hitler the benefits of including women in parliament--a change Hitler opposed. In this speech, she's only "a woman," as opposed to "woman," or even "women"; Führerprinzip left little room for the anonymous individual. The pattern of using definite articles to encapsulate demographics extended to describing fifth columns of German society, particularly in the case of Jews. In "Fighting the Enemies of the State", Reinhard Heydrich, the head of the SD, consistently used this pattern to describe the Reich's enemies: "the Jew, the freemason, and the politicized cleric." On "The Eternal Jew" poster, the faces of five jewish men are explicitly collectivised as "The Jew".

From these transformative mechanisms, the expression of Führerprinzip in Nazi propaganda enabled germans to "Speak Nazi," a language for discussing the racial and ideological composition of their nation. This language was both stable and simplistic. Across over a decade of the Third Reich, the principles of Führerprinzip propaganda were unchanged. The mechanisms that allowed Hindenburg and Hitler to appear congenially on posters in 1933 were the same that defined the later push of anti-semitism: a toolkit of motifs blurred the noise of heterogeneity to create the impression of a united block. Not all Nazi propaganda fits this mold; when collectivisation was not the goal--for example, in many posters promoting the good of the nuclear family for the individual's happiness--conservative styles were drawn upon instead. Yet for the vast majority of Nazi propaganda these motifs applied. Above order and unity, there was nothing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

On the eve of American entry into the maelstrom of the Great War, Woodrow Wilson solemnly implored congress and the American people to choose war, a choice made with "moderation of counsel and a temperateness of judgment befitting our character and our motives as a nation." The call to arms belies no trace of Wilson's warning three years earlier: as a country of people drawn chiefly from the nations in conflict, the United States itself could only be torn asunder by divided loyalties if it engulfed itself in the conflict. Successful entry of the United States into the Great War would necessitate the mobilization of every man, woman and child, uniting the American people across chasms of demographics and ideologies. The propaganda of America in World War I, in its aim to appeal to all through imagery, pallet, and message, established a lowest common denominator against which emerging groups, vying for legitimacy, juxtaposed themselves.


Attempting to address nation divided by gender, race, religion, and opinion, propagandists achieved efficacy by stirring public opinion on the broadest terms possible. If the challenge was to reach individuals with little more in common than they were each alive in the same country, it would be on those terms to which they were appealed. Patriotic imagery abounds in Wartime propaganda with near-universal utilization of tricolor pallet, the American flag, icons such as Uncle Sam, and even appeals by perished political figures: "That government of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth," appealed the faux-embossed head of Abraham Lincoln in one poster, "Buy Liberty Bonds." Complementing hyper-patriotism were advertisements ad hominem. One poster depicts a handsome, uniformed American against a dramatic blue sky with a rifle slung over his shoulder. His stance, triumphant and masculine is as defiant as the caption: "And they thought we couldn't fight!" The challenge of honor is archetypal of posters of this genre; The Second Artillery called for "200 REAL MEN" ("Will you be the one?"). Women, too, were courted along similar gender roles. The Food and Drug Administration fielded a slew of regionally targeted posters instructing women on the food to supply their household with. The "knit a bit" campaign went a step further in requesting women to use their skill of knitting for the war effort. 




