
- a distinction was drawn between a factual and a moral plane
- this was a false distinction; there was no factual plane
------------------------------------------------------------------------

The national discourse over the pogrom that emerged shortly after the publication of Neighbors was a macrocosm of the local frustrations of Jedwabnians. Critics in Polish academia seized challenges of historicity as a vehicle for disputing the moral ramifications of Neighbors. A month after Jedwabne's mayor called for an investigation, the Polish parliament initiated a sweeping reexamination of the massacre. The reports of the National Institute of Remembrance, finalized in 2003 and mostly corroborating Gross's findings, hardly established a truth to which all adhered.i Public opinion polls conducted in 2001 and 2002 revealed a fragmented understanding of the events that occurred in Jedwabne. Even after the publication of the IPN's report, 50% of those polled stated they were unsure who the perpetrators were; in another study, a significant minority indicated that Poles were among the victims of the pogrom.ii In 2005—two years after the IPN report and a full five after the publication of Neighbors—, the first monograph rebutting Neighbors was published, citing unamenable flaws of historicity as a cause for discrediting Neighbors. In The Massacre in Jedwabne, Polish historian Marek Chodakiewicz disputed both the severity of the massacre and the identity of its perpetrators. In contrast to Gross's estimate of 1,600 casualties, Chodakiewicz suggested a more paltry six hundred deaths.iii Chodakiewicz also disputed the identities of the perpetrators, contending that only a few antisocial Poles colluded with several truckloads of Gestapo in the murder of Jedwabne's Jews.iv

The work sparked a firestorm of controversy in Poland unusual for a contemporary Holocaust monograph. Not only have widely different narratives of the day's events since emerged, but the controversy of the historical episode of the small town has since transcended academia and erupted into mainstream Polish culture: shortly after the publication of Neighbors, the Polish government launched a federal investigation; former President Kwaśniewski's 2001 apology for the pogrom became a controversy in its own right; and much of the rhetoric discussing the massacre been vitriolic, even among academics. The ferocity of the Jedwabne debate reflects not a nation-wide appetite for accurate historical narratives, but a piercing test of Polish identity. The debate sparked by Gross's Neighbors transformed the town of Jedwabne into a metonym for Polish-Jewish relations and placed it at the center of a crisis of Polish nationalism.




 - gross's work prompted a shift historiography
 - core idea is the evasion of guilt
 - historicity?
 - response inside poland
   - response inside jedwabne
 - resposne outside of poland





 
"The Polish Version"
    1966 article in Bulletin of the Jewish Historical Institute
    -> Szymon Datner charges german specops on crimes against Jewish population of the Bialystok region after attack on USSR by 3rd reich <55>
    "Thos units were supported by 'native' police formations consisting fo traitors, fascists, degenerates, and criminals. Often playing on the lowest instincts of these people, the [German] units organized outbursts" [of popular fury] "supplying arms and giving instructions withotu themselves taking part in the slaughter."
    "As a rule, they photographed the scenes that were played out as evidence that the Jews were hated not only by the Germans."
    
    "The germans draged the dregs of the local community, as well as the so called Blue Police into these chrimes. This was a phenomenon that was relatively rare in occupied Poland, as well as in the rest of the Bialystok region, where the location population--Polish and Belarusian alike--refused to be hoodwinked by German provcation.. In a few cases , the local scum and criminal elements allowed themselves to be used as henchmen by the Germans. However, the majority of the work was done by German Hands."
    Doesn't address jedwabne directly
    
1989 0 Waldemar Monkiewicz, public prosecutioner
    "in early July 1941, 200 men from the 309th and 316th german olice battalions were detached to form a special unit, called Kommando Bialystok, under the command of Wolfgang Birkner, who was seconded from the Warsaw Gestapo.
    Only 10 july, this unit arrived in Jedabne by truck. Bot hthe gendarmerie and the auxiliary police were engaged in the operation carried out against the Jews. The auxiliary police were involved only in leading the victims to the square and escorting the victims to the square and escorting them out of the town.
    There, teh Nazis commited unspeakable cruelty, driving some 900 eople into a barn taht they next closed, and the walls of which they splashed with gasoline and set alight, causing the martyrs deaths of the men, women, and children inside.
    Two days later, these same perpetrators  murdered almost all the Jews in Radzilow.
    There, they burned approximately 650 people in a barn. In both Jedwabne and Radzilow, the Nazis attempted to drag some auxilary policement of Polish nationality into the pogrom. Those among them against whom any sort of involvement was proven [...] received severe punishment" <55-56>
    
1986
    250 aniversary of Jedwabe charter
    Monkiewicz stated 150 german police came into Jedwabne by motor vehical,
    estimated 600-900 dead
    "would omit for understandable reasons" mentioning the names of the Polish auxiliary police who had anything to do with the crime
    
1949
    22 poles tried in Lomza in 1949 for cooperating with Germans in murder of Jews of Jedwabne
    Death sentence pronounced against a volksdeutch from Ciezyn. Others sentenced to 8-15 years. None pleaded guilty. 
    Monkiewicz assers nazi state functionaries tried in Germany for the jedwabne crime.


Neighbors
    Convocation on morning of July 10 of all adult males to Jedwabne town Hall
    carts of people from nearby hamlets arrived since down
    typical of "wave of pogroms" for a core group of plunderers to move
    
    "On a certain day, at the request of Karolak and Sobuta, several dozen men assembled in front of the city hall in Jedwabne and were equipped by the German gendarmerie and Karolak and Sobuta with whips and clubs. Then Karolak and Sobuta ordered the assembled men to bring ot the swuare in front of the town hall all the Jews of Jedwabne." <56>
    
    At the same time, Jews were ordered to assemble at the square for a cleaning duty. 
        Not out of the ordinary.
        
    Vigilanti squads thwarted escapes
        teenagers grabbed Nielawicki as he tried to sneak aacross the fields to Wizna. Beaten and broughtto the square.
        Olszewicz beaten and brought ot the square
        100-200 succeeded in running away
    of those caught, some apprehended, but most killed where they stood.
    
    Karolak and town council excercised general supervision 
    
    "When I came to the square, they told me to give my barn to burn the jews, to which I started pleading to spare my barn. 
    
    Hunting
    
    Humiliation
        "I saw how Sobuta and Wasilewski took some dozen jews from amongthe assembled and ordered them to do some ridiculous gymnastic exercises" <62>
        "a group of Jews was brought to the little square to fell Lenins statue. When the jews broke the stature, they were told to put its varisus pieces on some boards and carry it around, and the rabbi was told to walk in front with his hat on a stick, and all had to sing, 'The war is because of us, the war is for us.'"
        
    Holocaust
        While carying the statue , all the Jews were chased toward the barn, and the barn was doused with gasoline and lit, and in this manner fifteen hundred Jewish people paerished." <62>
        
        Escape.
            Janek Neumark, sister, daughter tore themselves away when the barn door was blown open
            Staszek Sielawa barred their exit, wielding an ax
            Neumark disarmed him, ran away and hit in the semetary <63>
            
            Kobrzyniecki ignited the barn
            killed eighteen jews prior (two confirmed number)
        
    Plunder
        'inspite of this, people were trying to search the corpses, looking for valuables sewn in to the cloting. I touched a Brolin shoe-polish box. It clinked. I cut through it with a shovel, and some coins glittered [...] People jumped over to colect them, and this drew the attention of onlooking gendarmes. They searned everybody. And if someoneput the find in his pocket, they took it away and gave him a good shove. BUt anyone who hid it in his shoe savedthe catch. <64>
        
        "you insisted that you'd put things in order with the Jews, but you don't know how to put things in order at all." <65>
        
        About a dozen jews survived the war
        seven hidden in nearby Janczewo by Wyrzykowski family <65>
