1. A Story in Three Parts
    1. The Extant Narrative
    2. Gross's Revision
    3. Reactionary Revisionism
2. Secondary Sources, Primarily
    - Historiographical debate has largy vacated the discussion
3. Historicity

Massacure
    July 10, 1941
    Jews
    
1949
    22 poles tried in Lomza in 1949 for cooperating with Germans in murder of Jews of Jedwabne
    Death sentence pronounced against a volksdeutch from Ciezyn. Others sentenced to 8-15 years. None pleaded guilty. 
    Monkiewicz assers nazi state functionaries tried in Germany for the jedwabne crime.




------------------------------------------------------------------------
In his detailed 2011 synopsis of the investigation and trial, "Jedwabne Before the Court," Krzysztof Persak described a set of pervasive tropes in the accounts given. Initial testimonies by those detained were forthcoming in admitting non-violent participation. He notes Władysław Dąbrowski’s testimony as charactaristic of this pattern: "I did not take part in murdering Jews; I only took part in guarding them in the market square." The details of the actual murder were less forthcoming; the suspects spoke reluctantly about the events near the barn, and only four admitted to being there. Conversely, most of the individuals sought as prosecuting witnesses claimed emphetically to know nothing about any murder of Jews. The latter trope came to charactarize the processions of hearing before the Lomza District court on May 16 and 17, 1949. Most of the defendents redacted the statements they made during the investigation, and all pled not guilty. Although the defense attempted to shift the blame away from the accused, Persat notes that none proposed a narrative that shifted full responsibility for the massacre onto Gestapo forces. Ultimately, the court concluded that, while complicity in murder was a severe crime, those involved had been "forced to cooperate" with the Gestapo. Eleven of the defendents were sentenced to between eight and ten years of prison. Only one, Karol Bardoń, the was sentenced to death on the basis that he acted voluntarily. The remaining ten defendents were aquited for lack of evidence.

The prosecutors did not attempt to produce a complete narrative of the events of the pogrom, but the statements of the judges nonetheless suggest a crude outline. "The violence employed by the Germans [with respect] to the defendants was a result of a great number in which they appeared in Jedwabne on the critical day, and [of] the fact that the Jews had to be driven out of their homes to the assembly point, which the Germans could not do due to their relatively small number." While there were not a significant enough number of Germans to carry out the pogrom themselves, their numbers were such that they were able to coerce some of Jedwabne's inhabitants into cooperation. Moreover, they went on to clarify coercian should not be understood in the limited sense of a German personally overseeing that each defendant carried out their orders. <422>

Nonwithstanding a minor retrial that occured in 1954, historical memory of the Jedwabne massacre remained mostly static for another decade. In either 1962 or 1963, a monument memorializing the victims of the pogrom was erected by the Lozma ZBoWiD on the site of the mass grave in Jedwabne <NR52>. It's inscription purported both a count of the pogrom's victims and the identities of the perpentrators. "Execution site of the Jewish Population. The Gestapo and Nazi gendarmarie burned alive 1,600 people on 10 July, 1941". <424> In 1967, the Main Commission to Investigate Nazi War Crimes in Poland launched investigations into war crimes in the Bialystok region. The investigation into the Jedwabne crime similarly described it as "burning of around 1,600 Jews from Jedwabne, Łomża district, by the Germans in July 1941."

In 1966, Syzmon Datner, in an article in the Bulletin of the Jewish Historical Institute characterized the anti-Jewish crimes in the Bialystok after the attack on the USSR by Germany as being the product of German special operations forces. According to Datner, German units organized "outbursts", for propagandistic purposes: "As a rule, they photographed the scenes that were played out as evidence that the Jews were hated not only by the Germans." He contends that Germans collaborated with Poles in these crimes, supplying arms and inciting racial tension, but shying away from direct participation when possible. "The germans draged the dregs of the local community, as well as the so called Blue Police into these chrimes. This was a phenomenon that was relatively rare in occupied Poland, as well as in the rest of the Bialystok region, where the location population--Polish and Belarusian alike--refused to be hoodwinked by German provcation [...] In a few cases , the local scum and criminal elements allowed themselves to be used as henchmen by the Germans. However, the majority of the work was done by German Hands."
    
While Datner did not specifically describe the pogroms of Jedwabne, the model he described remained the primary premise of descriptions of the Jedwabne pogrom until the publication of Neighbors. After a three-year freeze of the renewed investigations begining in 1968, the legal investigation of the Jedwabne crime was taken over in 1971 by Waldemar Monkiewic. Over the next three years, Monkiewic interrogated five witnesses, resulting in the identificatio nof several Germans involved in the Pogrom. One witness, Julia Sokołowska, a cook at the gendarmarie post in Jedwabne, claimed there was a confluence of 240 gendarmaries in Jedwabne--most from surounding towns. Follow-up investigations conducted by Germany failed to bear fruit, and the Polish investigation into Jedwabne was discontined in 1977.

Between 1982 and 1989, Monkiewic published a series of articles purporting to construct a historical timeline of the events in Jedwabne. According to blankity blankerson, these reports reflected the best summary of historical memory after the pogrom. In 1986, in a ceremony marking the 250th aniversary of Jedwabne's town charter, Monkiewicz stated the pogrom was initiated when 150 police entered Jedwabne by motor vehical, and estimated between six-hundred and nine-hundred Jewish casualities. For what he described as "understandable reasons", he omitted mention of the names of the Polish auxiliary police known to be involved in the crime. Monkiewicz, gave a detailed synopsis of the event in Jedwabne three years later in the University of Bialystok's Studio Podlaskie:
    "In early July 1941, 200 men from the 309th and 316th german police battalions were detached to form a special unit, called Kommando Bialystok, under the command of Wolfgang Birkner, who was seconded from the Warsaw Gestapo. Only 10 july, this unit arrived in Jedabne by truck. Bot the gendarmerie and the auxiliary police were engaged in the operation carried out against the Jews. The auxiliary police were involved only in leading the victims to the square and escorting the victims to the square and escorting them out of the town. There, the Nazis commited unspeakable cruelty, driving some 900 people into a barn that they next closed, and the walls of which they splashed with gasoline and set alight, causing the martyrs deaths of the men, women, and children inside."
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jan T. Gross's first published revisionist analysis of the Jedwabne events--an essay published in 1999, "Lato 1941 w Jedwabnem" in the multi-author book, Non-provincial--went largly unnoticed. The work featured Wasersztejn's eye-witness account of the pogrom, but lacked the direction and force of his followup work. It was not until he saw Agnieszka Arnold's documentary "Neighbors" that he came to the "realization that Wasersztejn had to be taken literally." <NR341> In the Spring of 2000, Gross published "Sasiedzi: Historia zaglady zydowskiego miasteczka" (followed by it's english edition "Neighbors" a year later). At the same time, Gross, a professor of history at Princeton, published a series of english-language lectures on Jedwabne that were circulated on the internet.

As a revisionist work, Neighbors bore the onus on demonstrating the necessities of its revisions. As such, Neighbors presented not just the events of the progrom, but contextualized it the history and future of Jedwabne. Gross begins thusly, with a brief history of Poland and the town of Jedwabne. When Jedwabne received its town charter in 1736, it had alredy been settled for at least three hundred years. It's Jewish population bled over from the nearby town of Tykocin, and Jews were initially subject to the Tykocin Jewish communal authority. By 1770, however, Jedwabne Jews constructed a wooden synnagogue. The Jewish population numbered three-hundred-eighty-seven, a clear majority in a town with a total population of only four-hundred-fifty. Jedwabne's population climaxed at 3,000 on the eve of WWI but the devastation of war and the russian policy of jewish resettlement from near-front-line territories reduced the number of inhabitants to seven hundred. Over the next two decades, Jedwabne's population slowly recovered. By 1931, Jedwabne boasted 2,167 inhabitants. Jews formed a majority of the town's 144 craftsmen. The interwar period, was not without sporadic bouts of antisemitism. In 1934, a Jewish woman was killed in Jedwabne. The shooting of a peasent in a neighboring town a few days later fueled a rumor that Jedwabne's Jews had taken revenge on the poles. However, Gross contends that, true to his monograph's title, Jedwabne's Jews and Poles were mostly peaceful neighbors.

The first period of Soviet occupation strained this uneasy relationship. The signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact on August 23, 1939 paved the way for WWII and effectively partitioned Poland between the USSR and Germany. Hitler's armies invaded poland on September 1, 1939, followed by the Red Army on September 17. The precise boundaries of the parition, however, were not finalized until September 28th. Thus, for a brief period in the Autumn of 1939, Jedwabne was occupied by the Wehrmact, then surrendered to Soviet authorities. During this period, Jews across Poland aquired the reputaiton of having a priveledged relationship with the soviet occupiers. Gross does not doubt that Jews filled some government positions, but contends that there are no indications that the relationship between Jews and Poles in Jedwabne was any more antagonistic than elsewhere in Poland.

Gross traces the begining of the pogrom to the morning of July 10, when all of Jedwabne's Catholic adult males were called to to assemble outside the Jedwabne townhall. Gross surmises that there must have been some prior knowledge of what was to occur, as carts carrying people from nearby hamlets had been arriving since dawn. The assembled men "were equipped by the German gendarmerie and Karolak and Sobuta with whips and clubs. Then Karolak and Sobuta ordered the assembled men to bring ot the swuare in front of the town hall all the Jews of Jedwabne." <N56> The Jews were thusly ordered to assemble to the market square for cleaning duty. Such an order was not entirely out of the ordinary in Jewish-Polish relations of that period. Gross's narrative divides the subsequent events into four approximate phases: hunting, humiliation, holocaust and plunder.

Apparently cognizant that what was to ensue was not, in fact, 'cleaning duty', several hundred Jews attempted to escape. A band of teenagers brought captured Nielawicki as he attempted to flee across the fields to Wizna; he was beaten and brought to the square. Olszewicz, another Jewish survivor the pogrom, has his first escape thwarted similarly by roaming guards; he too was beaten and brought to the square. In all, Gross estimates between 100 and 200 Jews escaped from Jedwabne. Of those caught, some were brought to the square as Nielawicki and Olszewicz were, but most were killed on the spot. Testimonies singled out a member of the Kobrzyniecki family, first name historically unknown, as the most effective killer of this phase; in two separate testimonies, he is described as gutting eighteen Jews with a knife. 

Those who did not attempt to flee were subjected to humilating acts. A dozen Jews were ordered by Sobuta and Wasilewski "to do some ridiculous gymnastic exercises." Another group was ordered to fell a statue of Lenin errected by the Soviets during the previous period of occupation. " When the jews broke the stature, they were told to put its varisus pieces on some boards and carry it around, and the rabbi was told to walk in front with his hat on a stick, and all had to sing, 'The war is because of us, the war is for us.'" <N62>

Gross surmised that, having realized the relative ineffectiveness of piecmeal killings, the participants sought a more efficient method of execution. BLANK recalled, "When I came to the square, they told me to give my barn to burn the jews, to which I started pleading to spare my barn." Another barn was used, instead. "While carying the statue , all the Jews were chased toward the barn, and the barn was doused with gasoline and lit, and in this manner fifteen hundred Jewish people paerished." <62> The aforementioned member of the Kobrzyniecki family is identified as having lit the barn on fire. Three Jews entrapped in the barn managed to escape; Janek Neumark, his sister and daughter were pressed against the barn door when a blast of hot air blew it open. Though their exit was bared by Staszek Sielawa, wielding an axe, the trio managed to disarm him and make it to the cemetary, where they hid. 

Having ridden the town of most of it's Jews, the populants of Jedwabne found themselves grossly unprepared for the aftermath. The hot July weather fueled fears that an epidemic would ravage the town unless the corpses were disposed of with haste. The manager of Jedwabne's Gendarme accused the mayor of overpromising in a public confrontation: "You insisted that you'd put things in order with the Jews, but you don't know how to put things in order at all." <65> The plunder of Jewish property now began, a phase to which Gross devoted an entire chapter to. Those responsible for burying the corpses searched through the singed clothing for hidden valuables. Although the gendarmie attempted to sieze found property, "anyone who hid it in his shoe saved the catch." <64>

------------------------------------------------------------------------






Jan T. Gross published a revisionist analysis of the Jedwabne events in 1999, in an essay "

 
"The Polish Version"
    1966 article in Bulletin of the Jewish Historical Institute
    -> Szymon Datner charges german specops on crimes against Jewish population of the Bialystok region after attack on USSR by 3rd reich <55>
    "Thos units were supported by 'native' police formations consisting fo traitors, fascists, degenerates, and criminals. Often playing on the lowest instincts of these people, the [German] units organized outbursts" [of popular fury] "supplying arms and giving instructions withotu themselves taking part in the slaughter."
    "As a rule, they photographed the scenes that were played out as evidence that the Jews were hated not only by the Germans."
    
    "The germans draged the dregs of the local community, as well as the so called Blue Police into these chrimes. This was a phenomenon that was relatively rare in occupied Poland, as well as in the rest of the Bialystok region, where the location population--Polish and Belarusian alike--refused to be hoodwinked by German provcation.. In a few cases , the local scum and criminal elements allowed themselves to be used as henchmen by the Germans. However, the majority of the work was done by German Hands."
    Doesn't address jedwabne directly
    
1989 0 Waldemar Monkiewicz, public prosecutioner
    "in early July 1941, 200 men from the 309th and 316th german olice battalions were detached to form a special unit, called Kommando Bialystok, under the command of Wolfgang Birkner, who was seconded from the Warsaw Gestapo.
    Only 10 july, this unit arrived in Jedabne by truck. Bot hthe gendarmerie and the auxiliary police were engaged in the operation carried out against the Jews. The auxiliary police were involved only in leading the victims to the square and escorting the victims to the square and escorting them out of the town.
    There, teh Nazis commited unspeakable cruelty, driving some 900 eople into a barn taht they next closed, and the walls of which they splashed with gasoline and set alight, causing the martyrs deaths of the men, women, and children inside.
    Two days later, these same perpetrators  murdered almost all the Jews in Radzilow.
    There, they burned approximately 650 people in a barn. In both Jedwabne and Radzilow, the Nazis attempted to drag some auxilary policement of Polish nationality into the pogrom. Those among them against whom any sort of involvement was proven [...] received severe punishment" <55-56>
    
1986
    250 aniversary of Jedwabe charter
    Monkiewicz stated 150 german police came into Jedwabne by motor vehical,
    estimated 600-900 dead
    "would omit for understandable reasons" mentioning the names of the Polish auxiliary police who had anything to do with the crime
    
1949
    22 poles tried in Lomza in 1949 for cooperating with Germans in murder of Jews of Jedwabne
    Death sentence pronounced against a volksdeutch from Ciezyn. Others sentenced to 8-15 years. None pleaded guilty. 
    Monkiewicz assers nazi state functionaries tried in Germany for the jedwabne crime.


Neighbors
    Convocation on morning of July 10 of all adult males to Jedwabne town Hall
    carts of people from nearby hamlets arrived since down
    typical of "wave of pogroms" for a core group of plunderers to move
    
    "On a certain day, at the request of Karolak and Sobuta, several dozen men assembled in front of the city hall in Jedwabne and were equipped by the German gendarmerie and Karolak and Sobuta with whips and clubs. Then Karolak and Sobuta ordered the assembled men to bring ot the swuare in front of the town hall all the Jews of Jedwabne." <56>
    
    At the same time, Jews were ordered to assemble at the square for a cleaning duty. 
        Not out of the ordinary.
        
    Vigilanti squads thwarted escapes
        teenagers grabbed Nielawicki as he tried to sneak aacross the fields to Wizna. Beaten and broughtto the square.
        Olszewicz beaten and brought ot the square
        100-200 succeeded in running away
    of those caught, some apprehended, but most killed where they stood.
    
    Karolak and town council excercised general supervision 
    
    "When I came to the square, they told me to give my barn to burn the jews, to which I started pleading to spare my barn. 
    
    Hunting
    
    Humiliation
        "I saw how Sobuta and Wasilewski took some dozen jews from amongthe assembled and ordered them to do some ridiculous gymnastic exercises" <62>
        "a group of Jews was brought to the little square to fell Lenins statue. When the jews broke the stature, they were told to put its varisus pieces on some boards and carry it around, and the rabbi was told to walk in front with his hat on a stick, and all had to sing, 'The war is because of us, the war is for us.'"
        
    Holocaust
        While carying the statue , all the Jews were chased toward the barn, and the barn was doused with gasoline and lit, and in this manner fifteen hundred Jewish people paerished." <62>
        
        Escape.
            Janek Neumark, sister, daughter tore themselves away when the barn door was blown open
            Staszek Sielawa barred their exit, wielding an ax
            Neumark disarmed him, ran away and hit in the semetary <63>
            
            Kobrzyniecki ignited the barn
            killed eighteen jews prior (two confirmed number)
        
    Plunder
        'inspite of this, people were trying to search the corpses, looking for valuables sewn in to the cloting. I touched a Brolin shoe-polish box. It clinked. I cut through it with a shovel, and some coins glittered [...] People jumped over to colect them, and this drew the attention of onlooking gendarmes. They searned everybody. And if someoneput the find in his pocket, they took it away and gave him a good shove. BUt anyone who hid it in his shoe savedthe catch. <64>
        
        "you insisted that you'd put things in order with the Jews, but you don't know how to put things in order at all." <65>
        
        About a dozen jews survived the war
        seven hidden in nearby Janczewo by Wyrzykowski family <65>
    
        
