Although the testimony of Szmuel Waserztajn provided the impetus for the early legal investigations into the Jedwabne massacre, a treatment of the massacre corroborating his statements (which incriminated the Polish inhabitants of Jedwabne) was not produced until after his death on February 9, 2000. Later that Spring, Gross's article "Lato 1941 w Jedwabnem. Przyczynek do badań nad udziałem społeczności lokalnych w eksterminacji narodu żydowskiego w latach II wojny światowej" (Summer 1941 in Jedwabne: A contribution to research on the role of local societies in the extermination of the Jewish nation in the years of the Second World War) appeared in the festschrift dedicated to Tomasz Strzembosz, the leading historian on Polish-Jewish relations in the Bialystok region, Europa nieprowincjonalna. The article, for the most part, was a presentation of Szmuel Waserztajn's testimony without much additional historical work. Gross expanded his study of Jedwabne in an english-language paper entitled "Jews and Their Polish Neighbors: The Case of jedwabne during the Soviet Occupation in the SUmmer of 1941," presented at the conference "Polish-Jewish Relations during and after the Holocaust--New Approaches," held at New York's Yeshiva University. 

The publication of these articles germinated renewed interest in the massacre in both Poland and the United States. On May 5, Andrzej Kaszynski published "Calopalenie", the first of his articles referencing Gross's research, in Rzeczpospolita, a leading Polish daily newspaper. Morlan Ty Rogers, twenty-seven of who's relatives perished in the massacre, reproduced the article in English as "Burning Alive" on his website. Although the publication of Neighbors is usually cited as the begining of the controversy over the Jedwabne event, a nascent debate in fact grew in the ensuing weeks after Kaszynski's article. The Town Council of Jedwabne took its first steps undertook a revevaluation of the massacre on May 8, and by May 13, articles published in the Nationalistic daily Nasz Dziennik accused Daczynski and Gross of "propogating 'lies'".

Gross's monograph, "Sasiedza. Historio zaglady zydowskiego miasteczka," published on May 21, 2000, expanded his earlier non-critical retelling of Waserztajn's testimony of the Jedwabne controversy into a complete narrative of events by corroborating it with the testimonies of the 1949 trials. Gross traces the beginning of the pogrom to the morning of July 10, when all of Jedwabne's Catholic adult males were called to to assemble outside the Jedwabne town hall. Gross surmises that there must have been some prior knowledge of what was to occur, as carts carrying people from nearby hamlets had been arriving since dawn. The assembled men "were equipped by the German gendarmerie and Karolak and Sobuta with whips and clubs. Then Karolak and Sobuta ordered the assembled men to bring ot the swuare in front of the town hall all the Jews of Jedwabne." <N56> The Jews were thusly ordered to assemble to the market square for cleaning duty. Such an order was not entirely out of the ordinary in Jewish-Polish relations of that period. Gross's narrative divides the subsequent events into four approximate phases: hunting, humiliation, holocaust and plunder.
	
Apparently cognizant that what was to ensue was not, in fact, 'cleaning duty', several hundred Jews attempted to escape. A band of teenagers brought captured Nielawicki as he attempted to flee across the fields to Wizna; he was beaten and brought to the square. Olszewicz, another Jewish survivor the pogrom, has his first escape thwarted similarly by roaming guards; he too was beaten and brought to the square. In all, Gross estimates between 100 and 200 Jews escaped from Jedwabne. Of those caught, some were brought to the square as Nielawicki and Olszewicz were, but most were killed on the spot. Testimonies singled out a member of the Kobrzyniecki family, first name historically unknown, as the most effective killer of this phase; in two separate testimonies, he is described as gutting eighteen Jews with a knife. 
	
Those who did not attempt to flee were subjected to humiliating acts. A dozen Jews were ordered by Sobuta and Wasilewski "to do some ridiculous gymnastic exercises." Another group was ordered to fell a statue of Lenin errected by the Soviets during the previous period of occupation. " When the jews broke the stature, they were told to put its varisus pieces on some boards and carry it around, and the rabbi was told to walk in front with his hat on a stick, and all had to sing, 'The war is because of us, the war is for us.'" <N62>
	
Gross surmised that, having realized the relative ineffectiveness of piecmeal killings, the participants sought a more efficient method of execution. X recalled, "When I came to the square, they told me to give my barn to burn the Jews, to which I started pleading to spare my barn." Another barn was used, instead. "While varying the statue , all the Jews were chased toward the barn, and the barn was doused with gasoline and lit, and in this manner fifteen hundred Jewish people perished." <N22> The aforementioned member of the Kobrzyniecki family is identified as having lit the barn on fire. Three Jews entrapped in the barn managed to escape; Janek Neumark, his sister and daughter were pressed against the barn door when a blast of hot air blew it open. Though their exit was bared by Staszek Sielawa, wielding an axe, the trio managed to disarm him and make it to the cemetery, where they hid.
	
Having ridden the town of most of it's Jews, the remaining inhabitants of Jedwabne found themselves grossly unprepared for the aftermath. The hot July weather fueled fears that an epidemic would ravage the town unless the corpses were disposed of with haste. The manager of Jedwabne's Gendarme accused the mayor of over-promising in a public confrontation: "You insisted that you'd put things in order with the Jews, but you don't know how to put things in order at all." <N65> The plunder of Jewish property now began, a phase to which Gross devoted an entire chapter to. Those responsible for burying the corpses searched through the singed clothing for hidden valuables. Although the gendarmie attempted to seize found property, "anyone who hid it in his shoe saved the catch." <N64>

In the narration of the pogrom itself, Gross's own voice is sparsely heard; rather, he strings together the first-hand accounts of the pogrom in a cohesive manner. Although the testimonies of pogrom survivors such as Wasersztejn inspired Neighbor's alternative reading of the sources, they are not the primary testimonies heard in Neighbors. Nor does Gross focus on the most violent participants of the pogrom, those who set the barn ablaze or murdered Jews individually. Rather, filled with the accounts of those who stood by—the neighbors who refused shelter, who pedaled the property of the murdered Jews, and who harassed the very in Jedwabne few who protected Jews—Neighbors aligned complacency with collaboration. While this association is implicit (albeit, inescapable) during Gross's narration of the pogrom itself, Gross takes the additional step of devoting the succeeding chapters to a discussion of the moral ramifications of his findings and their context in broader Polish-Jewish relations.

Although the publication of Neighbor's was not, as some have said, an unprecedented spark to an unprecedented debate, it is notable that, unlike all previous treatments of the Jedwabne massacre, Gross's thesis succeeded in penetrating the public conscience. In the following few months, the academic debate of the Jedwabne controversy produced more journal articles than had been penned in it's fifty-year historiographic legacy--that's to say nothing of the popular outcry. Although scarcely new evidence of Jedwabne event has emerged since Neighbors, a slew of widely different narratives of the day's events emegred. Admist such a sudden outburst of debate, it seems unlikely that the ferocity of the debate over the Jedwabne massacre merely reflected a national appetite for history.

By the time Andrzej Kaszynski and Gabriela Szczesna visted Jedwabne in preparations for their May 5th and May 7th articles in Rzeczpospolita and Kontakty, respectively, a shift in the relationship between the town's inhabitants and the massacre had already begun. Since 1999, a small number of the Town's inhabitant's had gathered annually on July 10 at the site of the pogrom's memorial for a candlelight vigil. Whatever advancements had been made, unfettered dialog was not among them; Kaszynski reported difficulty in extracting statements from inhabitants. 

If Jedwabne's inhabitants were co-conspirators, it was not a conspiracy of igonrance they participated in, but one of silence. The elderly persons interviewed by Kaszynski generally confirmed Waserztajn's account of events insofar that Poles were foremost among the perpentrators. Henryek Adamczyk, twelve at time time of the massacre recalled, "My parents ordered me to hide but I can still hear the screaming of the Jews being led to their death, and I can smell the stench of the burning." Her husband, Eugeniusz Adamczyk, two tended to the memorial erected by the ZBoWid and was the first commander of the Citizen's Militia post in Jedwabne, recalled arresting three suspected perpetrators of the massacre and delivering them for interrogation to Lomza.

Both Kaszynski and Szczesna found that knowledge of the massacre crossed generations. In his interview with Szczensa, Krzysztof Godlewski, the mayor of Jedwabne, recalled, "the memory of them was constantly kept alive for us by Marianna Gosiewska, a prewar teacher. Krystyna Raszczyk, born after the massacre, learned of it from her grandfather: "A few Jews were able to escape from the column of death. I know this from my grandfather. Five of them hid in his orchard. Among them were Hancia and Szmujel; he could see who was murdering his son. Szmujel also told Grandfather that before herding them into the barn, the Poles ordered the Jews to remove their shoes good clothes, and jewelry." <NR1> Indeed, Kaszynski reported that, "When our photographer approached some youngsters gathered in the town square and asked them to point out any mementos of the Jedwabne jews, or the monument to them, they first asked with a hint of sarcasm whether he had come to take back the property that formerly belonged to the Jews."

Jedwabne's modern-day inhabitants remained fiercly protective of the reputation of their town, and their own reputation. Invariably, Kaszynski was assured that "none of the murderers is still alive." That was not to say that the memory of the massacre died with them. Jerzy Ramotowski, a secondary-school teacher in Jedwabne, reported that in the ensuing decades, "the names of the murderers have remained an open secret." The mayor noted his reluctance to exhume the Jedwabne massacre: "The truth is sacred. [...] However, I'm not in favor of simply naming the perpetrators of the crime [...] wounds should be left to heal and not be opened anew." <NR63>

Whatever opportunities for research enjoyed by Kaszynski and Szczesna on their visits to Jedwabne ended on May 5th--their visits to the town was among the last times--if not the very last time--that the town was visited in a 'pristine' state. Since the publication of Calopalenie, a magnifing glass loomed over the small town of Jedwabne--one through which the eyes of the world peered. When the assemblage of local townspeople visited the Pogrom's memorial for the fourth annual commemoriative vigil on July 10, 2000, they were met by throngs of journalists and a crew from Polish national television. <NR65> 

In her coverage of the commemoration, Maria Kaczynska encountered a reluctance to speak of the massacre, just as Kaszynski and Szczesna did. She recalled her discussion with one elderly woman, who insisted on remaining anonymous:
    The woman states that she knows how the tragedy occured because she was standing about twelve meters from the blazing barn. Earlier she had seen how peole were dragged out of their homes in town. She also saw the murderers but will not say who they were. She refuses to give her own name, or to agree to meet a reporter for an interview. "Let the truth be discovered by those whose duty it is. I'm scared," she says, breaking off and wiping her tears. 
Unlike the resistance Kaszynski and Szczesna encountered, however, the reluctance bred in the months of intense public scrutiny was born out of a fear of guilt--not guilt in the infamous massacre, but a new crime: the defamation of Jedwabne. "We've been stuck with the reputation of a criminal town," stated town council chairman Michalowski. "This is unfair. [...] We must differentiate the criminals from the normal people. This was just as much a tragedy for the latter as for those murdered."
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Michalowski was likely referring to the pain endured by those in the town who survived their Jewish friends, but a secondary meaning may be extracted from his words. The controversy over the Jedwabne massacre had become an existential threat to modern-day Jedwabne. Indeed, within a year of the publication of Gross's first works on the Jedwabne massacre, this latter tragedy had overtaken the massacre in both consequence and urgency. The scars of international scrutiney on the village were the primary of a roundtable discussion between prominant Jedwabneans on February 22, 2001. "Those who live hear and come from here will never be the same people they were a year ago," said Stanislaw Przechodzki, to the agreement of the entire panel. "The Jedwabne that existed before May 2000 is gone." Under what Przechodzki called the "psychological burdon" of "being on the lips of the world," the cohesiveness of the village of Jedwabne stretched to a breaking point, with no clear escape. "Jedwabne is a small place. Everyone here knows everyone else, and the tragedy concerns everyone," Przechodzki said. What lay ahead for Jedwabne remained unclear, but it was unequivocal that neither silence nor ignorance remaiend tennable excuses for muting discussion. Roundtable participant Stanislaw Michalowski recalled, "I witnessed a five-year-old child listening to a conversation among adults, and then sking, 'Listen Grandfather, was it you who murdered those jews, or your dad, or my dad?'"

That Jedwabne had changed was perhaps the only point of unanimous agreement in the discussion. The February rountable highlighted the emergence of stark disagreements in how Jedwabne should relate to its past. Przechodzki, director of the Lomza branch of the Podlasie Public Health Center and former inhabitant of Jedwabne, represented the view that Jedwabne must undergo a radical self-reflection. "The people of Jedwabne are facing a diffcult task," he stated. "They will have to accept the truth of events that, though they happened in the distant past, are nevertheless a tragedy that is very close to them today. But before that, they will have to prepare themselves by undergoing an internal mental change." In Przechodzki's view, the "truth" that Jedwabne needed to accept was, rougly speaking, the truth as presented by Jan Gross in Neighbors. Stanislaw Michalowski agreed, saying, "what happened in Jedwabhe 1941 is a painful but undeniable fact." As clear-cut as Przechodzki and Michalowski believed the truth to be, they acknowledged that the truth had not always been so unequivocal. Przechodzki contended that Jedwabne's present-day inhabitants had long been victims to a degree of self-deception: "They try to interpret [the massacre] in  their own way--not always in accordance with the truth--with the intention of protecting their families. These people will find it difficult to change and to accept the fact that certain events are irreversible. One always tries to seek an excuse."

On March 4, 2001, the Committee to Defend the Good Name of Jedwabne is established. Godlewski appointed chairman. Michal Kaminski of Lomza, representing Zjednoczenie Chrzescijansko-Narodowe (ZChN--Christian National Union) proose different strategies to the commitee. March 6, Godlewski's stragedgy rejected--resigns from the comittee. Kaminski replaces him, poposes a protest to govt agsinst "Worldwide campaign of slander against Jedwabne and whole of Poland.: Orlowski is principal comittee member. <NR454> 

The commemoration of the pogrom on 10 July 1941 was far removed from the quiet ceremonies of years past, englulfing the town with proceedings both in the main square, and at the site of the Jewish cemetaries. The centerpiece of the event was the christening of a new memorial to the massacred jews, inscribed in Hebrew, Yiddish and Polishk, "In memory of the Jews of Jedwabne and surrounding areas, men women, and children, fellow dwellers of this land, murdered and burned alive at this site on 10 July 1941." In the Town Square, President Aleksander Kwasniewski and the Israli ambassador to Poland, Szewach Weiss, delivered speaches. Rabbi Jacob Baker, a former inhabitant of Jedwabne, and chief rabbi of Warsaw and Lodz, Michael Schudrich, lead prayers at the new memorial. In all, aproximately one thousand persons attended, including major political reppresentatives, families of Jewish victims, and, most of all, ordinary Poles from across Poland. 

Even with such notable individuals in attendance, it is less remarkable who attended than it is who did not. While the ceremony was attended by members of the German episcopate, members of the Polish episcopate abstained from the event. Jedwabne Mayor Godlewski and town council chairman Michalowski attended the ceremony, but did so at the opposition of the town council. Under the leadership of Father Orlowski, who described the event as a "Jewish Celebration", nearly all of Jedwabne's two-thousand residents boycotted the commemoration. Later, on 17 July 2001, in comments to a local newspaper Gazeta Wspolczesna, Orlowski condembed the ceremony as a "sheer lie."

The ceremony makrs the high-point of tensions in Jedwabne. On August 5, after a dispute between Mayor Godlewski and the town council regarding Godlewski's proposal to construct a road leading to the new memorial, Mayor Godlewski resigned as mayor. In solidarity, town council chairman Stanislaw Michalowski resigned, as well. Political gridlock between Godlewski and most of the town council were only partly the cause of his leave--Godlewski reported receiving threats:
    I’ve received letters… They called me a traitor, a fool, a Jewish lackey. It was painful. But the truth has its price. You need to bear the consequences of staying your beliefs. There were only few of those unpleasant letters, a minority. There were more serious threats, too. “You’ll end up with a bullet an your head”, said one. I feel that I’ve closed a chapter in my life. I’ve worked for 20 years in Jedwabne. I would like to begin a new life. A life away from politics. I’ve suffered enough emotionally.
After his resignation, Godlewski fled Jedwabne, eventually settling in the United States.



The sixtieth anniversary ceremony was the first official commemoration held to the massacre. 
    Sixtieth anniversary
    Two parts
        - main squARE
        - OLD JEWISH CEMETARY AND NEW CEMETARY
    Notable attendees
        President of the Polish Third Republic - Aleksander Kwasniewski
        Israeli ambasador to poland, Szewach Weiss
        Rabbi Jacob Baker of New York and Rabbi Michael Schudrich, chief rabbi of Warsaw and odz, said prairs at new memorial
        -----
        Wladyslaw Bartoszewski - Ministry of Foreign Affairs
        Two vice-arliament speakers
        representatives of german episcopate are present
    

10 July 2001 - Official commemorative ceremony
    1000 peoe in attendance
        Members of polish episcopate do not take part
        Local population, led by Orlowski, boycot commemoriation, describe it as "the Jewish Celebration"
    Crzysztof  take part despite oppositon from the rest of the town council <NR457>
    in inerview with Gazeta Wspolczesna on July 17, commemoratio ndescribed as "sheer lie"
    claimed he had secret documents that proved Poles were not responsible for the killings
    
Godlewski forced to resign as mayor - http://www.apnewsarchive.com/2001/Polish-Mayor-Resigns-Over-Memorial/id-8ca4e4318b62d3fcb1f6780bebbb7e79
http://www.journeyman.tv/19033/documentaries/legacy-of-jedwabne.html
<JQ> http://jewishquarterly.org/2009/12/lessons-unlearned-and-learned/





'

Jedwabne faced a pressing set of questions 

How should Jedwabne Memorialize the Jews? 
    -naming the school
    -the monument?

Perhaps it shouldn't - Orlowski
    - Challenged the historicity of the massacre
    - 

That Jedwabne had changed, however, was one of the only points of agreement. 



Jedwabne became polarized between apologists and revisionists. 


"Father Orlowski has his information, and we have hours. How are we to tell who is right?"

"Over 95 percent of Jedwabne's preasent population came hear after the war. These people have no connection with the events of the summer of 1941."


The Plaque

The Murder

------------------------------------------------------------------------








<NR63-Szczensa> "The truth is sacred. It's obvious that the inscrition must be changed." says the mayor. "However, I'm not in favor of simply naming the perpetrators of the crime. The assasins from Jedwabne were a handful."

<NR65-kaczynska> "we've been coming here for hree years now and we light small cnaldes" says an eldly woman from Jedwabne who was eight years old on 10 July 1941. 

Jedwabne mayor Krzystof Godlewski and the town and district chairman Stanislaw Michalowski came ot the monument yestrrday before noon. They bought a mourining weath with a ribbon decorated with the words "For the murdered jedwabne residents of Jewish nationality, in memory and admonition--society"

Presence of residents, journalists, and a crew from olish national television. 

Godlewski -- "an investigation should be conducted and the truth should be established, one to which we will adhere. We cannot allowthe new monument to divide peole. This monument should unify and not divide. It should be a warning for the future.

Michalowski: "We've been stuck with the reputation of a criminal town. This is unfair. As in every community, different kinds of people lived here. We must differentiate the criminals from the nomral people. This was just as much a tragedy for the latter as for those murdered. 

