Andrezej Kacynski - Burnt Offering <50>
"These scholars did not, however, contribute to exposing the shocking truth about Polish involvement in the Nazi extermination of the Jews. This Knowledge has reached us from abroad."

1. "One Tragedies, Two Histories"
Bolder with tablet is only trace of 200 years of jewish presence
tablet accusing Nazis alone of pogrom does not tell entire truth
...nor do historians *living in* poland
-> Truth revealed by Jan T. Gross "of new York"

Discussion on the internet
distorted information, pogrom takes on new life
However: demonstrates curiosity in polish affairs <51>
    [why?]
    
2. Will they take back jewish property?
Jedwabne citizens refused to talk
young people knew the truth through family stories!
"None of the murderers is still alive"
demanded anonymity
Photographer asked by youths if he was here to take back property!?

3. "The Jewish Version"
poles were sole perpentrator
See: http://www.jewishgen.org/Yizkor/jedwabne
Summary of Neighbors, basically

4. "The Polish Version"
1966 article in Biuletyn Zydowskiego Instytutu Historycznego by Szymon Datner
    Charged german special ops
    supported by native" police formations consisting of "ntraitors, facists, degenerates, and criminals"
    [Guilt expelled from the nation]
    
Detailed polish account in 1989 by Waldemar Monkiewics, pblic prosecutor for investigation of Nazi Crimes <55>
ommited "for understandable reasons" mentioning the names of PPolish auxiliary police

Twenty two poles tried in Lomza in 1949 by soviets for collaborating in murder of Jews in Jedwabne
No guilty pleas, one death sentence
Asserts that nazi state functionaries were also tried in germany

5. To clarify, not to justify <56>
Tomasz Szarota contends primary purpose of pogroms was propaganda
    Demonstrated not just germany hated jews, supposedly
    Scenario fits jedwabne
    
1992- Andrzej Zbikowski contends that "aggression of local community was not exclusively a result of German manipulation"

Polish-Jewish relation deteriorated during two years of soviet occupation
Examples of anti-jewish sentiment

6. Memory
Yad Vashem - A Name and a Place
Jedwabne jews not given even that
Change happening in church
    Priest performed expiation
    Pope called attention to christian anti-semitism
